OK, let's go. OK, I'm ready. Enough about 2001
nights. Now, first of all, I should like to know
what interested you in oceanography.
Specifically, you mean? Specifically,
yeah. Well, my first real involvement in
oceanography was during World War II with surf and
beaches. working out of the University of
California on landing craft, performance of
waves, depths. That was my first actual
scientific involvement, 1945, I guess, 44, or
thereabouts.
More generally, of course, I'd been interested in
oceanography or in the oceans quite a long time
before that. I was a commercial fisherman for
three years off the Oregon coast and always was,
since childhood, was interested in the oceans and
got a great thrill out of fishing in the surf or off
the boat or out of a skiff. When were you a
commercial fisherman? About 1936 to 39. I have you
at Oregon State University from 30 to 41. That's
about right. It took me about that long to get
through. But I don't have you receiving a degree. I
didn't. I got a degree at Berkeley. That's right.
What did you do at Oregon State University? Oh, I
took things as long as I could stand it, and then did
something else. I joined and went in the forestry
service, worked in the three C's that were
settlement administration, worked as a logger,
went fishing, then go back to school.
Fortunately, I sort of kept up my academic record
there at reasonably respectable levels. It was a
good experience because it allowed me to take all
kinds of different subjects which I always felt I
profited from, engineering, science,
literature, and much better I think than in my
particular case than going straight through
school in some sort of a rigorous curriculum. Was
it economic pressure, the depression that sent
you to these various jobs, or was it just
wanderlust?
I was all three plus my poor handling of my finances
at various times. Such finances as they were
possible in those days. And did you primarily
concentrate on science while you were at Oregon
State, or just...? Yeah, science, math. I took
quite a bit of literature. History,
paleontology, engineering, chemistry,
chemical engineering.
scientist I think this kind of brought us
education is an essential if we're going to solve
our problems we have to have both kind of pennant we
have to have both penetrating minds and broadly
comprehensive ones people who have broad
interests and And I take exception in your point,
education, because I think a person who's broadly
interested will educate themselves into these
broader areas. But the whole idea that science is
going to make its breakthroughs and
understanding of the universe and man's position
in it from narrow approaches versus is boulder
dash. It's got to have both, narrowly penetrating
approaches and very broadly comprehensive ones.
Science, of course, has capitalized the last few
centuries on taking things apart. And now it's
clear the problem of putting things together. And
that's going to take people who have looked at all
the parts spread around the floor, you see. We're
much in the position of a 12-year-old stating the
TV apart on the kitchen floor, you know, without
seeing quite how it was together in the first place
in our science. I noticed when you go to Berkeley,
you major in engineering. That's what your degree
is, a BS in engineering. The fastest degree I could
get. Oh, okay. Was there such a thing as marine
engineering then? No, no, no. Well, there was
marine engineering, but that's boat building
type of thing. Old-fashioned marine
engineering, yeah. No, I took civil.
Okay. And expediency steered you in this
direction? No, I had... The reason I took
engineering is early in the war, just before the
war, I took a job as surveyor on a big naval base and
rather rapidly became the chief engineer without
any engineering training. And this interested me
quite a bit, several factors. First, engineering
was interesting, which is only applied physics,
really. And secondly, the fact I could do that well
without any formal engineering training seemed
to me to indicate that might be my fork. And so I
thought, why not get an engineering degree from
the best engineering school? So I did so. What were
your career goals when you received an
engineering degree? My career goals were to do...
I mean, when I did that, I thought I was going to be an
engineer. I truly did. My grandfather had been an
engineer and charge of the Harriman lines, chief
engineer for the Harriman lines. My father had
been chief engineer for the Canadian Pacific. And
I'd always been told I was going to be an engineer,
and I always had resented it and refused to
consider it. And at this time, I decided, yeah,
that's what I'm going to be. Then when I went out
looking for a job, they all sounded being the
sectional engineer at Dunsmuir or something like
that. I went back and asked Dean O'Brien if I
couldn't do some research in the engineering
department, and that's where I got started on the
waves, beaches, and surf. Oh, okay. That's where I
first met Ravel, too. Where, here? No, on the
waves, beaches, and surf. Oh, okay. That's what he
said. I was shocked all of a sudden when you'd
introduce him. something that didn't work out
well. Do you ever regret having not taken a higher
degree? Do I ever regret it? No, I don't think so.
I'm often told to make sure I never get one because
it's a phenomenon to have somebody and not have
one, you see. Do you think failure to earn one has
limited your career, if I may use that word?
I don't know. I haven't really thought about it a
hell of a lot. That's never worried me anyway. Let
me try a different way. Does it seem to you as if the
movement towards professional degrees since
World War II, when in effect graduate degrees have
become essential to the various academic
professions, do you think that's potentially a
mistake? Well, I think I would have progressed
farther and accomplished less, or I could have
progressed farther by accomplishing less, let me
say. If I'd had a higher degree there, that's a good
statement. Yeah. No, what strikes me is there are
all kinds of historians and scientists who come
out of World War II with either no degrees or BA
degrees who accomplish a great deal. That ends
someplace in the 50s as society becomes more
technical. And yet, in a way, it doesn't seem to be
as creative now as it once was. Would you agree with
that? Well, I don't know. There are pros and cons
about the higher degrees. It tends to be a document
that is an entree, of course. And I one time had a
student who was, I thought, quite dull. And I tried
to persuade him to forget about it and get a higher
degree. And he said, you mean all those five years
of work is wasted? And I said, you mean you didn't
learn anything? I said, what were you doing? It
can't be wasted. And he stopped for a minute, and
then he said the most intelligent thing he's ever
said. He says, you know, Dr. Isaacs, which was an
interesting statement in itself, I'm just not
smart enough to get anywhere without a PhD.
And he wasn't, that's for sure. So you see, the PhD,
it seems to me, and the higher degrees have their
pros and cons associated with them. Now, I want to
break away from the chronology for a second, and I
want you to describe and give the significance of
these things I've listed. Good heavens. Okay.
Now, first of all, before I begin, as an engineer,
were you asked to solve specialized problems? Is
this what... accounts for this list of
inventions, or as a matter of fact, did these come
to you? You're telling me now that you're going to
give me a list of inventions? Yes, that's right.
No, I always selected my own problems first. And
did people didn't come to you with research
problems and say, how would you as an engineer
solve this? Sometimes. Sometimes.
about how to make a mid-water trawl.
Well, if that occurred in the process of
mentioning these, would you explain who came to
you and what were the circumstances to involve?
Sure. Good heavens, that sounds like an endless
list. No, I only listed 12 or 13, just not all of
them, as a matter of fact. 1945, a device for
traversing surf zones and beaches. Oh. Well, I was
working then on amphibious craft and several
aspects. How in the devil did you get a line out
through these tremendous surfs of Northern
California and Oregon and Washington? Well, you
could shoot one out. And I would watch during the
war boats come in, land on the beach, get broadside
swamped, and somebody trying to get a line through
to pull them off or help them one way or another. And
they get broached and swung and so forth. So
wouldn't it be nice if you could just send a line
out? And wouldn't it be nice if you could put
something in the surf that would take an
instrument out there so you could measure the
waves? Or put a rod on it and measure the surf. So
it's obvious that waves have plenty of power to do
this kind of thing. So you make a flap and you
rectify the wave so it forces it only out. And he put
it together. And he said, no, nobody came to me on
that one. OK. Does your work with this lead you
later on to working with wave power? Wave
propulsion, sure. Sure, years later. Also
understanding something about undertow and
worrying about sand motion and quite a few things.
All right. And this began, in effect, from a
military project. Yeah. military project of
understanding amphibious craft. Okay. Would you
judge the military, if I may say that, to play a
sizable role in the development and advancement
of oceanography in this period? Of course. ONR
was, which was Ravel's baby, was of course a
powerful influence and a very, very valuable one.
One of the best sponsors of research that ever
existed. I was also thinking possibly about
experience gained in things in anti-submarine
warfare, for example, in anti-mine activities.
Sure, a lot of those things have worked out.
You really have to look at the environment of a
submarine, and this gives you, I think, requires
considerable thought into just exactly what is
the meaning of placing this object in the ocean and
its influences on it. Some of that, of course,
classified material, but the mine itself, the
objects on the bottom, the manner in which scour
takes place, the release of particles, the
release of bubbles, the influence, the
collections of fish around it as part of the
biological response to this object. All these
things are part of beginning to build up a model of
how the ocean puts together, even though they are
directed towards a specific military need, I
think. If you look at them not as a highly specified
task, but rather as, from the broader standpoint
of here's an object within the natural
environment, how does it make its presence known
and what are its influences? Then, of course, if
you look at it that way, it has not just the military
limitation. ONR allowed you to do these sorts of
things. It was one of the most...
ONR, I think, was one of the freest and most
valuable types of sponsorship that oceanography
has ever had. Do you think ONR is more
mission-oriented now than it was then? Sure, I
think so. I hardly know what it's like. I have very
little contact with it. I think it's gotten very
mission-oriented. Is there any particular
explanation for that? Oh, I think the whole United
States has never kind of quite recovered from the
more bangs for a buck or how many philosophy. That
is, a fixed objective towards which you progress
never allows for the unexpected to emerge, does
it? The unexpected is almost always more valuable
than the expected, because expected is something
you obviously know can exist. Unexpected can be
unlimited in its importance.
What about the magnesium rod release device in
1947? Oh, heavens. Yeah. Well, I was trying to make
a pressure gauge for measuring waves in deep water
and did so, but I needed to load it in cockets. After
it got to depth, I needed to open up a reservoir so it
flooded with gas, and I needed something that was
simple that would release it. And Dean O'Brien
said to me, as a matter of fact, Dean O'Brien, the
head of the engineering school at Berkeley, said
to me, why don't you look into magnesium? It makes a
good little battery with steel or brass. And so I
put it together, and it looked fine. Just held the
valve open with a magnesium wire. After an easily
calculable time, it released. That all led into
looking at magnesium batteries. Magnesium was
its power source. OK. What about the torpedo net in
1947? Yeah. Yeah, that was a more or less specific
project. And that was one of the few projects I ever
worked with. what was then the Bureau of Yards and
Docks, I think, in which they had a great deal of
trouble with torpedo nets tearing apart. Well, a
torpedo net is a very strange object. manner in
which stress is distributed through it is
complicated. But more particularly, that was the
first hint I had of what's more recently developed
into several things called, for instance, the
breakwater, in that these big net floats behave
very curiously in the sea. And they behave very
curiously because they were non-Archimedean
bodies, to use the word improperly. bodies on the
sea surface that had much more displacement than
they had mass, and free to move with. So they were
forced to move in an exaggerated fashion. This is
one of the reasons that the torpedo nets were torn
apart, because the floats were driven by
something other than the orbital velocities of
the waves. And this put them out of phase with the
net that they were supporting. And this is the
first hint I got of, as you begin to get larger and
larger things in the ocean, accelerated forces
play the more dominant role than surface forces.
Does this end up later on then also involved in the
energy project? Oh, sure. Yeah. Yeah. Well, does
it also end up? But the principal thing you see is
something that is a concept which other people
have probably understood much better than I have.
But as you go to these larger and larger objects in a
varying pressure field, like a wave,
the smaller objects are driven by drag, ordinary
drag forces, hydraulic, hydrodynamic drag. And
then, even though you keep everything
symmetrical and you merely scale it up into larger
and larger dimensions, there's one aspect, and
that's the accelerated forces, that scales on a
one-to-one basis. That is, the forces are always
equal to the volume. In other words, the dimension
to the third power. where its surface forces go
like the dimension squared. And thus, when you
begin to get into very large objects, but not too
large objects, in the wave field, such as the big
lakes of Texas Towers, an offshore drilling
platform, it's clear that they're driven far more
by the accelerated forces, which act on the total
volume of them, than by the surface forces. And you
might as well forget the surface forces. And these
are aspects that are still forgotten. For
instance, in these big OTEC programs, where
you're starting to put very large, slow-moving
things in the ocean for ocean thermal energy
conversion, the people, the very erudite people
at APL and Lockheed, just totally forgot the fact
that they're mainly dealing with accelerations,
inertial forces. rather than the ordinary
conventional frictional hydrodynamic dragons.
And so they've made some mistakes.
See, one thing scales like the square of the
dimensions. The other scales like the cube of the
dimensions. And even though it's a trivial effect
at very small dimensions, it becomes a dominant on
a very large dimension, since it's going up like a
cube.
You've been out in the desert and you've seen these
great boulders as big as a room that are way out in
the desert somewhere? Yes. How'd they get there?
They're obviously carried there by water. Well,
at the moment that a flood wave hits a boulder like
that, the crest of a flood wave hits a boulder, the
boulder is easily moved as a sand grain. Because
you see, it's now at that moment subject to volume
forces that scale just exactly like its weight.
For frictional forces, it didn't care less. Once
the flood flow is established, the boulder sits
there. It's like a lead toad that works. But at that
instant, when the crest comes, it's as easily
moved as a sand grain. So for an instance, it's
moved. And a succession of these, and out it is, out
in the desert, miles away. You can't conceive of
how it got there. This is all part of the same
phenomenology. And I think it's an interesting
one. I believe I capitalized on it in a couple of
cases, yeah. That came from the submarine net
problem, yes. Okay, and what about the thermopile
wave meter? Well, that's... I watched these.
These are all very old things.
That was a special problem, I think. I wanted to
see... if we couldn't establish a very simple wave
measuring device that could be put out to sea
simply by a landing craft, dropped by a landing
craft. So a beach master trying to bring landing
craft in through the surf could observe the
oncoming waves before they became breakers on a
meter of some sort on the beach. and guide the
landing craft into the lower breakers to come to
the surf zone. Now, it didn't need to be exact. All
it needed to be was relative correct. He would see
big waves coming in. He'd see the breakers. He'd
know they couldn't survive that. And then he'd see
a series of lower waves coming in. And he could
beckon them in at that point, see, or vector them in
with the radio. So that's the simplest device I
could think of, a bag of gas. It's adiabatically
heated and cooled by the wave pressure in there and
a simple little thermopile inside up against sea
water on conductive to sea water on the other side
to make the cold junction or the reference
junction. And it just responded to the waves, and
he could see the high ones, and he could see the low
ones. That's all he had to see. He didn't have to
know how high they were. He knew that the big ones
were producing waves, breakers that he didn't
want his craft to be in. He could tell them to
retract or to dander at the optimum times. That was
the purpose of that whole
thing. What about the Isaac's kid mid-water
troll? There's a case where Dr. Hubbs came
to me and he wanted Annette to really take the run
deep, fast, and take the bath pelagic fish. And Lou
Kidd and I worked on that. And I must say, I think we
lucked out on that one because it's always been a
bit strange to me that we cut that, we got that net
hung, we got that diving vane made, We got the
bridles cut and we took it out to sea and
immediately we filled beautifully, dove
beautifully, went down deep and we could tow it at
three, four thousand meters at reasonable speeds
and Even today, if those bridles are cut a few
inches different, the damn thing doesn't work. I
never understood. You know, we could have been so
discouraged we'd never have followed it through.
And I see that thing all over the world, you know,
and that bridle is right to the same inch. And it was
pretty much of a thrill, really, in those days. I
remember those days quite well. On our first trips
out, we would make hauls that would, increased the
number of specimens of some rare fish in the
museums of the world by 50. You know, one haul.
There had only been 10 in all the museums of the
world. We get 500 of the things. And of course, then
specimen after specimen, it was totally
unidentified. It was quite a thrill. We made a
20-foot one one time. rammed it into the bottom
through an axe or a parlance. Took one of the
greatest bottom trawls that anybody ever took.
Rare brachiopods and glass sponges. That's
probably considered in terms of oceanography
your most important and famous invention. Would
you agree with that? Oh, I don't. I wouldn't try to
judge it. It certainly has been very broadly
spread around the world. And I kind of suffer from
it to some extent, because I go to some outlandish
place, and that's what I'm known for. You see, the
Isaac Kidman letter trunk. Well, I'm really
trying to edge your question in to you unfairly, so
let me ask you directly. That is, if you should like
to name what you consider your major
accomplishment, what would you name? You mean
something specific? Something specific, yeah.
If you just wanted, you know, it was always said
John Adams wanted such and such carved upon his
tombstone. If you just had to be remembered for one
thing, what would you like to be remembered for?
Oh, good heavens, I'd hate to be remembered for one
thing.
Well, I'd rather to think this whole approach of
this dynamic breakwater is going to be a
considerable breakthrough. I think it's going to
revolutionize The whole method of defending
ourselves against the destructive influences of
waves, beach erosion, harbors, I think it has the
potential of allowing the
defense of our eroding coastlines, of protecting
structures offshore, of making harbors of refuge
in the open sea of protecting small beaches at
fishing villages and remote places in a way that
can be afforded of
so that people can pull their primitive boats out
over the over the beach and get themselves some
fish and
make swimming beaches in places where Surf now
makes it essentially impossible, and on and on.
There's quite a different approach to harbor
protection, for example, than these damn rubble
mound breakwaters. And of course, it's totally
the opposite direction. It's interesting to
conceive that no matter how long you develop the
rubble mound breakwater, you'd never come up with
the idea of putting the lightest possible thing in
the ocean. And it takes a 180 degree shift to do
that. And it works on a different principle.
I think maybe that's it. I'd expect to see the
iceberg really solve some problems. I think the
Israelis would do it now. They don't really have
the money. But they would do it, except the minimum
iceberg they could bring is too big. It covers the
whole damn state with three feet of water. Arabs
are going to do it, or so have announced. And it
certainly is a natural one for them. The US is too
followed up, I think, to do anything quite so
dramatic.